# Law of conservation of charge
Charge cannot be created or destroyed. So the total sum of charge in a closed system is constant. 
# Coulomb's Law
Used to calculate the magnitude of the electric force two charged bodies exert on each other.
$$
|F_e|={K |q_1q_2| \over r^2}
$$
where $K\approx 9 \times 10^9 {N\cdot m^2 \over C}$ (in vacuum) is referred to as the **Coulomb constant**.

# Electric Field 
A charged particle $q_1$ generates an electric field around itself. Electric field is not the same as electric force. It is the force per charge at a point in space that a charged particle would experience. To calculate the electric field at a point, we place a charged particle in the field, and divide the force it experiences by its charge.
$$
\vec E_Q = {\vec F_e \over Q}
$$
At any point in the field, a charged particle $q_2$ experiences an electric force that is the product of the electric field generated by $q_1$ and the charge of $q_2$:
$$
\vec F = q_2 \vec E_{q_{1}}
$$
The strength of this field is directly proportional to the amount of charge, and inversely to the square distance from the charged body. 

Note that $q_2$ also creates an electric field, but it doesn't affect itself. You cannot lift yourself by pulling on your belt.
```tikz
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzpicture}[node distance={30mm}, main/.style={draw, circle}, every node/.style={fill=white, scale=1}]
\node[main] (1) at (0,0) {$q_1$};
    \def\r{5}
    \foreach \i in {0,...,24} {
        \pgfmathsetmacro{\alpha}{\i * 15}
        \pgfmathsetmacro{\y}{sin(\alpha)}
        \pgfmathsetmacro{\x}{cos(\alpha)}
        \foreach \j in {1,...,3} {
            \pgfmathsetmacro{\s}{\r - \j}
            \draw[->] (1) -- ({\x*\s},{\y*\s});
        }
    }

\node[main] (2) at (-2,1) {$q_2$};

\end{tikzpicture}
\end{document}
```
By convention, electric fields generated by a positive charge point outwards. We test this with a positive test particle:
$$
\vec E_Q = {\vec F_e \over Q}
$$
If  $Q>0$, $\vec E_Q \ \text{and} \ \vec F_e$ face the same direction. Else if $Q<0$, they point to the opposite direction. 

With that established, positive particles experience a force in the direction of the field, and negative particles experience a force opposite to the field.
```tikz
```

Electric fields allow us to abstract the details of what created the field in the first place.

We can find the magnitude of electric field using coulomb's law
$$
E={F_2 \over Q_2}={{K|Q_1Q_2| \over r^2} \over Q_2} = {K|Q_1| \over r^2}
$$
So the magnitude of the electric field at point depends on the charge that created it and the distance from that charge. 

An electric field is really a vector space.


## Electric field at point $p$ by a uniformly charged infinite sheet



# Electric Potential Energy $U_e$
Electric potential energy of a system composing of two charged particles at a distant $r$ is given by:
$$
U_e={KQ_1Q_2 \over r}
$$

This formula is derived using integration. For the curious minds, checkout this video. Otherwise, the details aren't super important to us.
<center>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NLPoCUVq1Kk?si=ASDDYilJq_DCtBAF" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>

Potential energy can be negative. We're interested in the change of potential energy, since energy is conserved and potential energy is converted to other forms.

# Electric Potential $V$

Let's suppose we have a charged particle $Q_1$ in some space. The electric potential energy that a charged particle $Q_2$ with 1 standardized unit of charge (coulomb) would experience at a point in space. The idea is very similar to an electric field, but we're working with scalars.
Plugging in 1 for $Q_2$, we get:
$$\begin{align}
V={KQ_1 \over r} \\
{{Nm^2 \over C^2}C \over m}={Nm \over C}={J \over C}
\end{align}
$$

__Electric potential and [[Circuits and Components#Voltage|voltage]] are not the same.__ Voltage is the change in electric potential between two points:
$$
\text{Voltage} = \Delta V
$$
So by definition, voltage is the change of the potential energy of 1 unit of charge as it moves across a system, such as a circuit.

Electric potential can be negative. Negative charges create negative electric potentials. 
If we have multiple charged particles in the system, we sum the electric potential created by all the particles to get the total electric potential at a point. Here's where a negative electric potential makes sense. Where positive particles add to the potential build up, a negative particle alleviates the pressure because positives and negatives attract and that lowers the potential energy.  


# Why doesn't voltage gradually drop in a circuit?

Energy is conserved. If an object falls from a distance, it's potential energy due to gravity gets converted to kinetic energy and heat due to air resistance. But what about in a circuit?
```tikz

\usepackage{pgfmath}
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzpicture}[every node/.style={fill=white, scale=1}, main/.style={draw, circle, fill=white}, invisible/.style={draw=none, fill=none}]

\node[invisible] (1) at (0,0) {$y_f$};
\node[invisible] (2) at (0,6) {$y_i$};
\node[invisible] (3) at (6,0) {};
\node[main] (4) at (3,6) {$m$};
\node[main] (5) at (3,0) {$m$};

% Used for positioning equation label
\node[invisible] (6) at (4,3) {};
% Equation label
\node[invisible, scale=2] [right of=6] {$\Delta PE=- \Delta KE$};

\draw[-, line width=3] (1) -- (5) -- (3);
\draw[->] (4) -- node[left] {$f_g \downarrow$} ++ (5);

\end{tikzpicture}
\end{document} 
```

The change in the kinetic energy is very little after the circuit is connected to the battery source. Electrons constantly bump into atom and lose their acceleration, so their draft velocity (velocity of charged particles due to an electric field) is very small. Electrons move through copper wires with virtually no resistance. So, electric potential energy is not being converted to any other forms. This means that with no resistors in the circuit, the voltage should be constant.
```tikz
\usepackage{circuitikz}
\usepackage{pgfmath}
\begin{document}

\begin{circuitikz}[american, voltage shift=0.5]

    % Draw the main circuit
    \draw (0,0)
        % 9V Battery
        to[battery, l=$V$] (0,2)
        -- (6,2)
        -- (6, 0)
        to[cspst, l=$Breaker$] (0,0);

\end{circuitikz}
\end{document}
```
Resistors will cause the voltage to drop because of the heat generated due to collisions. But the voltage is still constant, even though lower than if there was no resistance.

This isn't an entirely accurate way to think of electrons because they're not simple particles. But it suffices for our purposes here.



# Electric flux
This is used to study electric field lines more quantitatively. From a qualitative analysis, electric field lines are closer together when the field is strong, meaning they're more dense. 

Assuming uniform (constant) electric field, the electric flux through a surface is at its maximum value when that surface is perpendicular to the surface. This is because more lines go through the surface. As we rotate the surface such that $\theta \to 0$, where $\theta$ is the angle between the field lines and the surface, the electric flux also approaches 0 because there is less surface area available for the field lines to go through. 

```tikz
\begin{document}
\begin{tikzpicture}[every node/.style={fill=white, scale=1}, main/.style={draw, circle, fill=white}, invisible/.style={draw=none, fill=none}]

% Draw axes for reference
\draw[->, line width=1, dashed] (0,0,0) -- (10,0,0) node[right] {$x$};
\draw[->, line width=1, dashed] (0,0,0) -- (0,6,0) node[above] {$y$};
\draw[->, line width=1, dashed] (0,0,0) -- (0,0,8) node[below] {$z$};
	
\foreach \i in {1,...,10} {
    \draw[->, line width=1] (0,{\i/2},0) -- (10,{\i/2},5);
}

\coordinate (A) at (3,0,3);
\coordinate (B) at (3,0,-6);
\coordinate (C) at (0,3,-6);
\coordinate (D) at (1,3,3);

\filldraw[fill=blue!20, draw=black] (A) -- (B) -- (C) -- (D) -- cycle;

\end{tikzpicture}
\end{document}
```

The following will hold for a uniform electric field. $A\cos\theta$ refers to the proportion of the surface area through which the field lines go.
$$
\begin{align}
E &= |\vec E| &&\text{Simplify symbols}\\\\
\Phi_E&=EA_\perp \\ 
&=EA\cos\theta \\
&=\vec E \cdot \vec A \\\\
\end{align}
$$

Now suppose the electric field isn't constant throughout the entire surface area, or the surface isn't a simple sheet.
Integrating over a closed surface gives us the net electric flux. For some areas, the flux will be negative (when $\theta > 90 \textdegree$), zero ($\theta = 90 \textdegree$), and positive ($\theta = 90 \textdegree$). When we integrate, we get the net flux, which is the sum of all fluxes over the surface area of the closed surface.

# Gauss's Law
>The electric field due to a uniformly charged sphere in the region external to the sphere is equivalent to that of a point charge located at the center of the sphere.

