**Heap** - unordered pile of data
Tables are heaps. Rows get inserted at the end of a page and make their way to the front, and there is no ordering. 
### Sequences
Before Postgres 10, we would use the `SERIAL` pseudo-type for when we want a column to auto-increment when a new column is inserted. It's syntactic sugar in Postgres that attaches a sequence object to a column. It is not an SQL concept.
```sql
CREATE TABLE users (
id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
...
)
```
Internally, Postgres creates an Sequence object for this table, which is basically a table with only one column, responsible for generating the next number in the sequence. When the table gets an insert query, Postgres will get the next number from the sequence via an atomic operation (so concurrency is preserved). Often, Postgres will obtain hundreds of numbers from the sequence and caches them in memory for added efficiency. The catch is that when an operation fails or if the system crashes, the numbers are lost. This creates *gaps in the sequence*. That is why people fall for the "we'll never hit 2 billion rows" trap. You might only have 500 million rows in your table and already be out of sequence numbers. And that is when the system will crash, and you'll have to recompile the schema, rebuild indices, etc., which means downtimes in a production environment--an absolute nightmare.

The moral of the story is, **don't use a 32-bit primary key because it will overflow way faster than you think. Use UUIDs (128-bit string) or BIGINT (64-bit integer).**

### Identity Columns
- Unlike SERIAL, identity columns are part of the SQL standard. Both of these do the same exact job: attaching a sequence to a column. 
- SERIAL is just a default value. You can insert any value in that column. If, however, sequence generates that same value in the future, the application will crash due to a duplicate key error. Example: Imagine you insert 50 for ID and the sequence is at 40. The sequence will eventually reach 50 and the app will crash. `GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY`, will however blocks attempts to insert values into that column. 
- With SERIAL, the sequence table is a separate entity from the table, so permissions are also different. Any permissions and roles will have to be assigned to both tables. But identity columns are bound to the table and are considered as one.


```sql
CREATE TABLE people (
	-- strict, highly recommended. only DB can generate/insert this via sequence
    id INT GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY,
    name VARCHAR(80)
);
 
CREATE TABLE products (
	-- relaxed. similar to SERIAL, you can manually insert values 
    product_id INT GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY,
    product_name VARCHAR(100)
);

```
### How and Where PostgreSQL Stores Data
On disk, you can find the directory where Postgres stores data by running the following query on a database:
```sql
SHOW data_directory;
```
This will return a directory like `C:/Program Files/PostgreSQL/17/data/base`
Under this dir, you will find multiple subdirectories named random numbers. These numbers are the **OID** (object identifier) of the databases. Inside these directories, you will see many files representing tables, indices, etc.. Interestingly, the size of all files in kilobytes is a number that's a multiple of 8, including 0. That is because these files are made of **pages**, and *every page in PostgreSQL is exactly 8 Kilobytes by default.*
A **page** (also known as a **block**) is the fundamental unit of storage that Postgres uses for I/O operations. 
Tables and indices are arrays of blocks. That means that Postgres writes to and reads from the disk block by block—8 KBs at a time—not row by row.


You can read more about the structure of a page from the [official documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/storage-page-layout.html):
```cardlink
url: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/storage-page-layout.html
title: "66.6. Database Page Layout"
description: "66.6.&nbsp;Database Page Layout # 66.6.1. Table Row Layout This section provides an overview of the page format used within PostgreSQL …"
host: www.postgresql.org
image: https://www.postgresql.org/media/img/about/press/elephant.png
```
Naming convention for *page data* (`pd`) attributes commonly start with `pd_`, like `pd_checksum` and `pd_flags`. 

If a row is too large to be stored in a page 1, Postgres stores that row separately in page 2 and leaves a pointer to page 2 in page 1. This mechanism is called **TOAST** (The Oversized-Attribute Storage Technique). TOAST compresses large data by default. If a row is larger than 8KB, Postgres will have to decompress the row and join it back into the query results, which will take extra time and processing power. So a *good practice is to avoid using generalized queries like `SELECT * from table` or `... WHERE large_text_column LIKE '%search_term%'`*  (because Postgres will go through TOASTed columns) and specifically query for columns that we do need. 
But TOAST *can* make querying for other columns faster because there is fewer rows in a page to go through.

As we mentioned, all updates and inserts to tables are not immediately written. That would be too slow. Instead, Postgres saves changes in a **Write-Ahead Logging (WAL)** file on disk and tells the user the change was made. But in practice, it will write the change to the disk later. This way, if the system crashes, it can retrieve changes made to the database. 

Postgres is a relational database. The term **relation** comes from relational algebra, the foundation for relational databases and SQL. 
In this branch of mathematics, a table is referred to as a **relation**. A row is called a **tuple**. And, a column is called an **attribute**.
Postgres expands on the definition of a relation: any database object that behaves like a table (has columns and rows and can be queried) is considered a relation. It includes standard tables, indexes, **views**, **materialized views**.

The **OID** is a unique, 32 bit unsigned integer assigned to Postgres **objects**. The first 14 bits are reserved for system objects, and the rest are available for user created objects. Every object has an OID.
OID acts as a primary key in **system catalogs**.

Postgres **objects** include: 
- tables
- rows
- users
- groups and roles
- indexes
- **functions and stored procedures**, 
- etc..

Postgres has *a global counter* in order to generate the next OID when a new object is created, and it's frequently saved to disk for persistence. 
When we reach the end of the 32 bit number, we loop back to the start of the number pool for user reserved for objects (i.e. 16,384, which is 2^14+1 and up). Some numbers may be taken already, so we keep going up until we reach a number that is free for use.

==OIDs for user objects is deprecated in modern Postgres ? ==


**System catalogs** are internal tables that Postgres uses to keep track of tables, columns, data types, roles, and functions—the internal structure. A few examples are:
- `pg_class` - keeps track of tables using OID as primary key. It has a column named `relfilenode`, which specifies the file name of the table on disk. When an object is created, `relfilenode` equals the value of OID. But as time goes on and objects move to different files, OID stays the same, but the value of `relfilenode` changes.
- `pg_attribute` - keeps track of columns of a table. Each column is an object and gets its own OID. This table has a row named `attrelid` (attribute relation id) that stores the OID of the table the column belongs to (acts as a foreign key)
- `pg_type`
- `pg_proc` stores functions
Postgres uses its own system to run itself. Which is pretty neat from a design standpoint.
OID identifies the logical concept of a table in the system catalogs.

A **database transaction** is work done on the database. It could include multiple operations. It must either completely go through or fail altogether. Example: bank money transfer from one account to another.

### Postgres Functions and Procedures
#### Functions
SQL **functions** are [[ACID compliance|ACID compliant]]. It's all or nothing. If a function fails, the entire transaction fails and the database rolls back to its previous state.
In general, functions take in arguments and return a result. They are included in the SQL standard; therefore, all implementations of SQL (Postgres, MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, etc..) support functions and add additional features. We've already seen examples of scalar functions like `MAX()` and `COUNT()`. Read more about them [[SQL#`Count`|here]]. These are used with a `SELECT` statement. 


Advantages of storing functions in a SQL database over the backend is reducing traffic, centralized logic, and security. Authorized people can run a query right there on the database server and get the results. Otherwise, you would have to query for potentially millions of rows of data and transfer them to the backend server; you would have to write additional code for authentication and authorization... In short, why reinvent the wheel when Postgres gives you the ability to write functions in the database?

Here's an example of a function in Postgres that takes in a price, applies a discount, and returns the new price.
```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION calculate_final_price(original_price NUMERIC, discount_percent NUMERIC) RETURNS NUMERIC -- Function header
AS 
$$ -- For convenience, function body is often placed inside $$ $$ in order to avoid the need to escaping characters such as single quotations 
DECLARE -- Declarnig local variables
    discount_amount NUMERIC;
    final_price NUMERIC;
BEGIN -- Function logic goes between BEGIN and END
    discount_amount := original_price * (discount_percent / 100.0);
    final_price := original_price - discount_amount;
    RETURN final_price;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql; -- We need to specify which language Postgres engine should use to interpret the function body (usually plpgsql or sql)
```
The moment this query is executed, Postgres will store it in its system catalogs (`pg_proc`), and we can henceforth We can use this function in queries 

We can even write SQL functions in other languages such as Python and C by using Postgres extensions. 
```sql
CREATE EXTENSION plpython3u;
CREATE FUNCTION pymax (a integer, b integer) RETURNS integer 
AS 
$$
  if a > b:
      return a
  return b
$$ LANGUAGE plpython3u;
```
But the question is, should we use another language?
The 'u' in `plpython3u` stands for *untrusted*. That is because Python allows interacting with the operating system of the machine on which the database server is running, and this opens room for injection attacks. As a result, only a superuser could create a SQL function that runs python code. 

#### Backend function or database function? 
Is it better to:
1. bring the code to the data
2. or the data to the code? 
In other words, run computations on the SQL server and return the results to the backend, or return the data and perform computations on the backend? It depends.
Option 1 is fast because the data is right there on the database. We could read 5 million rows, for example, perform a matric operation, and return a single number. It's also easy on the network as we won't have to return a massive amount of data through the network. But taking away from the server resources can create delays in responding to follow up queries. Databases are harder to scale compared to the backend. So depending on how heavy the function load is, we would go for option 2.

#### Procedures
**Procedures** (introduced in Postgres 11) are designed to run tasks rather than computations and returning results. These are used with a `CALL` statement.

Here's an example of a procedure involving a bank transaction. We deduce a given amount from one account (row in a table) and add it to another.
```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE transfer(sender_id INT, receiver_id INT, amount DECIMAL)
AS $$
BEGIN
    -- update accounts table: decrement the balance attribute for the given row where key=id by the given amount 
    UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - amount WHERE id = sender_id;

    -- Add to receiver's account
    UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + amount WHERE id = receiver_id;

    -- commit the transaction 
    COMMIT;
END;
$$ LANGUAGE plpgsql;
```


### **Query execution plans**
Postgres calculates several ways to retrieve data for the given query and picks the best one. 
It takes a long time to consider every single path (just like in recursive backtracking) to get data and find the best one, so Postgres picks something that is just good enough. Usually that is the best option anyways.
We can view the query plan by putting the command `EXPLAIN` in front of our query:
```sql
EXPLAIN SELECT * FROM users;
```
This will give an approximation of the following:
- How much time to read the first page (in milliseconds) - this signifies precomputations (loading an index table, for example) Postgres does before it even starts to read files
- How much time to finish the query (in ms)
- The number of rows it will go through (statistically driven)
- Estimated average size of rows (in bytes)
- Join method
- Scan method
- Indices used

On more complex analysis, read from the bottom to top


```sql
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM users;
```
Runs the query and returns actual stats about the query performance
We must be **careful when running queries `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`.


Postgres doesn't allow us to select a plan or add our own. However, we can do **Query Hints** in other DBSMs like Microsoft SQL server. We can force the query to use a specific index or a specific join method.

Here's a summary of terms you might come across when studying the results of the EXPLAIN command:
- **Seq Scan (Sequential Scan):** The database is reading the entire table from top to bottom. This is fine for tiny tables or when you are requesting a huge percentage of the table's rows, but it is a red flag if you are only looking for a single row in a massive table.
- **Index Scan:** The database is using an index to find the exact location of the rows, then fetching those specific rows from the main table. This is usually what you want to see for filtered queries.
- **Index Only Scan:** The holy grail of scans. The database found all the data you requested directly inside the index itself and didn't even have to visit the main table.
- **Nested Loop:** A join method where the database takes one row from the first table and loops through the second table to find a match. Great for joining small datasets, but terrible for massive ones.
- **Hash Join:** A highly efficient join method for larger datasets where Postgres builds a hash table in memory from the smaller table, then scans the larger table and probes the hash table for matches.

```cardlink
url: https://youtu.be/P7EUFtjeAmI
title: "Postgres Explain Explained - How Databases Prepare Optimal Query Plans to Execute SQL"
description: "In This video I'll go through how Explain works in PostgreSQL, explain is the command that you add to the beginning of your SQL to return details about how t..."
host: youtu.be
favicon: https://www.youtube.com/s/desktop/5a20cf88/img/favicon_32x32.png
image: https://i.ytimg.com/vi/P7EUFtjeAmI/hqdefault.jpg
```

### Taking advantage of indices with SARGABLE queries
Performing joins on columns that are indexed significantly improves performance
SARGABLE—**S**earch **ARG**ument **ABLE**—is writing queries in a way that they take advantage of database indices for maximum efficiency.
Compare these two queries:
```sql
SELECT ... WHERE order_date >= '2023-01-01'
SELECT ... WHERE YEAR(order_date) >= '2023'
```
The first query can use the index to filter for all dates passed Jan 1, 2023
But the second query will pass all rows through the `YEAR` function, even if there is an index for `order_date`, then compare the results with `'2023'`. That is terrible in terms of efficiency.

To write SARGABLE queries:
- Do not use functions in the `WHERE` clause for indexed columns—that defeats the purpose of the index
- If you need to use a function, use a **function-based index** or create a column dedicated for the calculations
- Use direct comparisons


`JOIN` and `WHERE` conditions can take advantage of queries.
But we cannot create indices too many indices either. While indexing makes reads significantly faster, it  adds time complexity for writes. That's because, after each update, Postgres has to go in and update the indices (the b-trees) so they retain their balance. Now imagine we have a table with columns rows and we create an index for each row. When we add/update a row, Postgres has to update 20 b-trees. These indices also occupy space. So ==only create indices where it's truly beneficial to the system.==


### Partial index
A **partial index** is a normal index, but it only keeps track of rows where a specific condition is met. 
Suppose a government agency needs to frequently query a massive table (with 100 million rows) to search for people in the retirement age. If there are  only 10 million that qualify, we can create a B-tree index with only 10 million nodes instead of 100 million—that's $1 \over 10$ of the size. Considering that we indices are cached in memory RAM and frequently updated due to new inserts, queries like the following become much faster:
```SQL
SELECT * from people WHERE age >= 63 and name = "Alexander Hamilton"
```
But, the partial index is completely useless for queries that don't use the `age` filter. 

We can create a partial index as follows:
```SQL
CREATE INDEX retirement_age_index ON people (age) WHERE age >= 63;
```

### Multi-Column Index
Think of these like sorting through a phone book. You might first sort by last name. Then, by first name. People with the same last name are sorted. You can use this to search for people by last name, last name and first name, but not first name. A similar logic is applied to multi-column indices. Columns are searched from left to right.

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx_names ON users (last_name, first_name);
```

✅ `SELECT * from people WHERE last_name = "Smith" AND first_name = "John"`
✅ `SELECT * from people WHERE last_name = "Smith" AND first_name = "John"`
❌ `SELECT * from people WHERE first_name = "John"`

B-trees are again used for multi-column indices, just like in a normal index. The data structure is organized by lexicographically comparing a tuple of the columns. If the index was based on just `last_name`, we compare last names to find out where the node goes in the tree. If it's based on `last_name` and `first_name`, we compare `(last_name, first_name)` tuples.
### Function-Based Index (Expression Index)
also known as index on expression or functional index in Postgres
If you frequently filter rows based on the result of a function, e.g. you apply some sort of mathematical formula to find out the most profitable item in a store, you can create an index based that function. Postgres will apply the function to every row and create an index based on the results. In the b-tree, we would have (result, pointer to row) tuples. We're basically storing pre-computed values in the tree. So, whenever we want to query based a table on the results of a specific function, Postgres will use this index for extremely quick results. 

### Cluster: Two meanings in Postgres
In Postgres, a **cluster** is the collection of all the databases running on a single instance of a server software. These databases are under the same directory, but are logically isolated. Even then, they share some system catalogs like `pg_roles` and `pg_database` (which stores information about the databases in the cluster).


#### Random I/O vs. Sequential I/O
So an index makes queries much, much faster because it tells us where on disk a row is, right? But we still have to travel to it. In other words, we have to wait until the disk head physically goes to the location on the disk. If the rows are at random locations on the disk, chances are we have to wait for the head to do one full rotation before we can read the next row in the query. But, if the rows were physically right next to each other on the disk, well our queries would become even faster. 
And that's exactly what the `CLUSTER` command does: it *sorts table rows based on a user-defined attribute and places them in sequential order on the disk*. This *makes queries based on a range incredibly fast*.
```sql
CLUSTER customers USING idx_customers_last_name
```

#### Clustering caveats
**Covering index**: ==If we're only querying for an attribute that already exists in the index (b-tree), then Postgres doesn't need to open the files (pages) because it already has access to everything it needs==.  This is called a *covering index*, and it makes clustering pointless. 
For example, if we index our table based on `ID`, and we do a query like `SELECT ID from customers WHERE ID < 100`, Postgres gets all the data it needs from the index. It doesn't need to open a file because all the data it needs can be found in the index.

``SELECT ID from customers WHERE = 100`` is another example where clustering is not used. 
The *downside* is that the *database becomes locked*—no writing or reading—while clustering takes place (`ACCESS EXCLUSIVE` lock). Furthermore, new data is added randomly to the next open slot in the page. So *adding data undoes clustering*.

#### Solutions
If adding/updating data undoes clustering, then how can clustering be used in production environments? 
- [[Postgres#Table Partitioning|Table partitioning]] is usually the best option
- Use the Postgres extension `pg_repack`. It creates a new table in the background and copies the data over in clustered order, and then switches the tables, without locking the table. We can run it via a **cron job** (which is a task scheduler used by Linux) during low-traffic periods (e.g., weekly or monthly)
- Use a [[Postgres#Clustering caveats|covering index]] to completely bypass the need for clustering
- Lower the `fillfactor`: allow row updates to occur in the same page. This helps when cluster degradation due to frequent updates rather than new inserts in our table. [[Postgres#Postgres Does Not Update Rows in Place|Postgres creates entirely new rows when updating an existing row]]. Therefore, by lowering the fill factor to 90%, Postgres leaves 10% of a page empty so future updates could be placed in the same page
```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, description TEXT) WITH (fillfactor = 90); -- create a new table
ALTER TABLE table_name SET (fillfactor = 90); -- update an existing table
```

### Postgres Does Not Update Rows in Place
Instead, it creates new rows, most likely in a different page.
It has to do with concurrency - allowing multiple people to write to and read from the database without interference
Suppose you're querying a table, and it takes 5 minutes to complete. We can't lock everyone else out of the table for 5 minutes. At the same time, we can't allow others to write into the table while we're querying it because that would corrupt the data. 
Postgres keeps both versions. It marks the outdated row as a dead tuple, so future queries won't read it. 
Postgres uses its background _autovacuum daemon_ called **Autovacuum** to automatically, physically remove the expired rows in order to prevent bloat

My SQL server does updates in place.

### VACUM
The standard `VACUUM` command goes through tables in the database and removes dead rows (i.e. deleted/updated rows) from pages in order to free space for new rows. This works *concurrently* with other operations (i.e. it does not block reads or writes). Database files (where the pages live) do not change—just more space becomes available.
`VACUUM FULL` does the same thing as the standard version, but it creates entirely new database files and migrates data into them, therefore freeing up and releasing storage to the operating system. It puts an `ACCESS EXCLUSIVE` lock on the database however, meaning no reads or writes can occur until this process completes.


### Table Partitioning



### Transaction IDs and Multi-Version Concurrency Control
Every non-read transaction (write/update/delete) has a **transaction ID (TXID)**: a unique, 32-bit integer that increments by 1. It loops back to 0 once it reaches the last number.
Every row has two hidden values: 
- `xmin`: ID of the transaction that creates a row
- `xmax`. ID of the transaction that deletes or updates a row. Before updated/deleted, the default value of `xmax` for each row is 0.
Before a query begins, Postgres takes a snapshot of the system: it records the current XID, XIDs of all other current transactions not yet finished,  
and it makes comparisons to the xmin and xmax values at each row to decide whether it should be included or ignored.
This system of achieving concurrency—where read and write operations do not interfere with each other—in Postgres is called **multi-version concurrency control (MVCC)**.

Hint-bits
Visibility map


### Database distribution
How to scale our database for heavy reads, heavy writes, or both. 
#### Replicas—Heavy reading
We have a *primary* server that only allows writes. We also have multiple *replica* servers that we distribute read requests traffic to. The primary records changes in a WAL file and streams them to the replicas so they can all become in sync.
<center>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/VtBVofpdXyk?si=CkfcvieRo1i3D916" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</center>

#### Sharding—Heavy writing
Sharding is horizontally scaling writes in our database. We can have multiple write databases, and add and remove servers as needed. The goal is to evenly distribute traffic across our database servers. 

We need a *connection pooler* to manage incoming requests so no one server gets overwhelmed. If 10,000 requests come in together, the pooler will queue them and assign a connection pool from its reserves and serve the traffic in order, something like a thread pool. Read more about thread pools [[Cores vs Threads|here]].

##### How do we distribute traffic? 
There are 3 ways we could do this: 
1. Range-based sharding—we assign a range of IDs to each shard. User IDs 0-1 million go to shard A, 1 to 2 millions to go B, and so on. The advantage of this is that *range queries become very easy* because we don't have to do multi-shard queries because the data is stored together. Imagine we're storing data from multiple sensors, and we're querying for time ranges.  Each sensor would get its own shard. We would use a **composite sharding key**, like `{shard, time}` for this case. 
The downside is hotspots and difficult rebalancing. 

2. Directory-based sharding—we use a map to store, but this adds another layer between the backend and the database; it's a bottleneck, meaning if it goes down it the system fails; and, it adds delays because we now have to go through more logic.   
3. **Consistent hashing**—This is the industry standard method for distributing data.
With simple key hashing, we calculate hash(*sharding key*) mod number of servers. But when the number of server changes (a server is added or if one crashes), the formula will start to yield different values than before, leading to inconsistencies. So we would have to move nearly all the data, which is a massive downside.
Instead, we use a technique called **consistent hashing**. We pick a range of numbers, let's say from 0 to 100, that circles back to the start. We assign a number to each server and distribute them evenly across the range. Each spot on the circle is a node. We use the consistent hashing formula. Whatever number we get, we move clockwise until we get to the next node.
**Virtual nodes** are used for the sole purpose of even data distribution.
You can use more virtual nodes on the hash ring to represent the more powerful servers, increasing the odds traffic goes to it.

In practice, this hash ring is implemented using a tree map, which uses a [[Tree Map]] underneath 

only a fraction of data gets repositioned.

```cardlink
url: https://youtu.be/UF9Iqmg94tk
title: "Consistent Hashing | Algorithms You Should Know #1"
description: "Weekly system design newsletter: https://bit.ly/3tfAlYDCheckout our bestselling System Design Interview books: Volume 1: https://amzn.to/3Ou7gkdVolume 2: htt..."
host: youtu.be
favicon: https://www.youtube.com/s/desktop/ab5c3a01/img/favicon_32x32.png
image: https://i.ytimg.com/vi/UF9Iqmg94tk/maxresdefault.jpg
```


A good sharding key needs to:
1. Have high **cardinality** (lots of unique values)
2. Have even distribution (so that we don't end up with **hot spots**), 
3. And be relevant to the queries

#### Sharding + Replicas
We combine sharding and replication by creating a sort of a matrix of servers. We divide our writes to multiple shards, and each shard gets  multiple replicas. We use a query router (basically a reverse proxy) to handle traffic logically. We would host the database instances as containers and use an engine like Kubernetes to handle failures.

The query router also handles **failover**, which is a fail-safe mechanic for when a database goes down and we automatically switch to using a replica to avoid downtimes.

|Shard|Primary|Replica 1|Replica 2|
|---|---|---|---|
|Shard A|DB-A1|DB-A2|DB-A3|
|Shard B|DB-B1|DB-B2|DB-B3|
|Shard C|DB-C1|DB-C2|DB-C3|


This is all happening on the database level. We can move the complexity to the application layer instead through the use of architectures like [[CQRS and Event Sourcing|CQRS]], which is a better solution.

This should be a final step. Try caching, indexing, query optimization, adding replicas, and then as a last resort, move to sharding. Do we even need sharding? Do the math. How many users? How much data per user? 

# How do we deal with expensive multi-shard queries?
First strategy is try to avoid it altogether


# How to maintain data consistency across multiple shards
Suppose we have two bank accounts that live in separate shards. A traditional, 1-database transaction is atomic. But what about when we're working with multiple databases?  
Is this not built into the Postgres software already?
2PC - 2 phase commit
Saga patterns?

Do we need to shard or create replicas? What are the typical capabilities of a single instance? Given some numbers about the user reads and write stats, what calculations would we need to do to decide if we need sharding or how many servers we need?


```cardlink
url: https://youtu.be/L521gizea4s
title: "Sharding in System Design Interviews w/ Meta Staff Engineer"
description: "A simple explanation of database Sharding in the context of system design interviews. Excalidraw used in video: https://link.excalidraw.com/l/56zGeHiLyKZ/1Se..."
host: youtu.be
favicon: https://www.youtube.com/s/desktop/ab5c3a01/img/favicon_32x32.png
image: https://i.ytimg.com/vi/L521gizea4s/maxresdefault.jpg
```




# How to pick primary and secondary keys


# Data de-normalization


# Multi-Tennant applications

# Citus
https://www.crunchydata.com/blog/citus-the-misunderstood-postgres-extension


# Indexing
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BHCSL_ZifI0
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lYh6LrSIDvY

### MySQL Clustered Vs Non-Clustered Indexes

```cardlink
url: https://youtu.be/ITcOiLSfVJQ
title: "Clustered vs. Nonclustered Index Structures in SQL Server"
description: "Clustered and nonclustered indexes share many of the same internal structures, but they're fundamentally different in nature. Watch Microsoft Certified IT Pr..."
host: youtu.be
favicon: https://www.youtube.com/s/desktop/dfbe401e/img/favicon_32x32.png
image: https://i.ytimg.com/vi/ITcOiLSfVJQ/maxresdefault.jpg
```


# Types of keys
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eexceRsWt3g

