Previously, we discussed [[Process Modeling with Data Flow Diagrams|process modeling]] via data flow diagrams. Now we're ready to explore data modeling (class diagrams) and how it integrates into systems design and analysis.

Process modeling graphs the flow of data in and out of our system; it shows us how data connects the different components of our system together. Data modeling is used to describe the said data--its type, attributes, methods, and relationship to other data types in the system. Process models and data models two sides of the same coin: they complement each other in the analysis phase, and both are valuable tools for system analysts for producing a blueprint for implementing the system in the subsequent phases of SDLC. As a result, "it is essential that the process, logic, and data model descriptions of a system are consistent and complete because each describes different, but complementary, views of the same information system" (Valacich, George, & Hoffer, 2019, p. 244).

Class models are a popular type of data models that take advantage of the many benefits of object-oriented programming (OOP), including encapsulation and polymorphism. An object--an instance of a class--is a collection of sensitive data and methods that operate on the data, access to which should be restricted to authorized entities. Encapsulation allows us to "encapsulate" the state (attributes and behaviors) of an object, giving us full control over what is shared and what is kept private from the rest of the system, adding a measure of security in the object model.

Polymorphism, on the other hand, makes the system flexible and improves its scalability. It allows us to treat objects of different classes as if they are the same. This way, if one class becomes obsolete or is otherwise no longer relevant, we can replace it with another class and the functionality of the system will resume as if nothing has changed.